I'll just put this over here.
You came to this, your involvement in Hypertext is a very interesting phenomenon for me to see.
You're an established, respected novelist in print.
How do we account for this?
Well, there's several reasons, but one of the things I should have brought along, I didn't think of it, now that you brought that up.
Back in the 60s, I developed a note-taking mechanism.
Using these edge-notch cards, the kind of cards that have little holes around the edges.
You sometimes see full-page ones used for filing kinds of things.
They have these little rows.
You take a punch,
And I came on this character who was having a really hard time.
He said, can you tell me how you get into the computer system?
So I showed him how you do that.
And I thought, well, you know, I've been only on really working hard at it for three, four weeks myself.
But I felt very smart because this guy was really needing help.
So I helped him through his little beginning struggles and so on.
And the next time I saw him,
He was doing some fabulous stuff.
And I watched him and said, my God.
First of all, I said, how are you doing?
I looked what he was doing.
I couldn't believe it.
And it turned out that he had helped build computers.
He knew everything about them.
He did it.
They didn't know how to log in.
I mean, that's a little thing you have to learn.
And so he became, in a way, a kind of—he taught me a lot of things.
We became friends.
And I got him—he was a Milton scholar in the grad—English grad school.
But he's really interested to play here, and I got him appointed as a computer adjunct to the English department.
And he did a lot of things for us.
And he helped found this IRIS group.
They developed a hypertext software called Intermedia.
And a professor friend of mine, George Landau, got interested in this stuff.
Landau's famous.
Yeah.
Well, Landau was involved with IRIS.
helped to develop intermedia and was the first to use it.
So, in the late 80s, he was urging me to get into it myself.
Of course, well, that was kind of more than I wanted to get involved with.
It looked kind of complicated, my own little things to do.
And I thought, well, I'll get a student, a student who was very keen on getting into it, a grad student, I'll get him a teaching class.
I had a job for a year, teaching a beginning hypertext workshop.
I failed.
I cried, and they said, no, if you apply for it, you might do it, but we can't do this for students.
So I went away on a sabbatical, and I came back, and I had a free course to choose.
I was teaching a workshop, and I could do something else.
I ran into Landao, and of course I went, all right, I'll have a go.
But at this time, I still had never had a mouse in my hand.
I had no idea about these things.
I'd never played with Windows.
I was still a DOS user thoroughly.
I'd created my own macros and saw I inside DOS, but I had no idea.
This was pre-Windows, and I'd never
and then on a Mac I looked over people's shoulders at him.
So I taught according to him, I taught on Mac, because he had that window.
I got an assistant, a grad student,
who was badgering me to be his undergraduate advisor for his thesis, and I was turning him down, and then we got into this hypertext stuff, and he said, would you like a TA for that work?
He said, yeah, you know, he had Landau's course, so he made a deal.
I would be his advisor, he'd be my TA.
That fellow is Robert Arellano, who is still there.
Yeah, well, Bobby is really, really good, and I've managed over the years to keep finding him.
So he's on a presidential fellowship there now for three years, and teaching my hyperculture workshops on Illinois.
So he was my team.
We had a class, and about ten students, brave students, decided to have a go.
They didn't know what this was, and I didn't know what it was.
And there was nothing quite published.
There were a couple of things that Eastgate was producing at that time, but Michael Joyce's afternoon was still handed around this.
it wasn't you know it wasn't well i think in fact he's just about to publish it but the copy we had and stuff so all of the early hypertext fiction was still in the developmental stage and there was a group at brown which i often went to their meetings called chug computers and humanities users group chug chug invited
people come talk about computer issues in the humanities, and library issues very typically.
I was aware of how libraries were changing back in the mid to late 80s, attending those meetings.
Stuart Malthrop and Michael Joyce had been invitees, so I'd seen a bit what they were doing.
then they left stuff behind.
So we had some sense of it.
We didn't know really, I was completely unaware of what would happen, and that's what that first piece was based on, was an opening experience, an opening awareness of how the stuff worked.
I don't confess to my 60s involvement with a similar idea, but that's what made it easy, so that I was not
I was not surprised at the possibility.
In fact, they looked like enhancements.
And just to go back, what did you call that machine?
Did you have a name for that machine?
It was just edge-notch cards, and you used a punch and steel needles.
That's all.
And it was basically an early database?
Yeah, it was a database idea.
And in fact, it was a kind of...
hand-punched way of doing what was developing shortly thereafter, in the early 70s, was those computer cards that you'd see.
I don't know if you ever saw the composer's work.
I was at Princeton for a year and got to know Babbitt and all his people and had this electronic, the Princeton-Columbian Electronic Music Center.
And the computer music was just catching on.
It's a new idea.
But it was done with
immense decks of punched cards.
I mean, immense decks of punched cards to get a little bit of sound.
I mean, it wasn't yet much.
It was just a huge thing.
Well, mine was like an even more primitive version of that.
Those punches, at least you could order up these.
I had to actually get the punch out for it.
It looked like that.
But was it an exercise for you, or was it actually useful as a retrieval system for information?
It would have been.
very useful, but for the fact that the punching took a lot longer than the note-taking.
And it led to ideas.
You'd be, take a card that would have, I don't know, about hypertext, let's say, I'd written some notes about it, and I would see that there would be reason to punch it for reasons of hypertext and for reasons of computers, for reasons of writing, but also maybe because of its content, for reasons of
Oh, I don't know, some social issue or some question about time and space or whatever.
And the more I thought about the way to punch it, or to get more and more punches, I would think of new notes.
So I'd be writing six or seven notes while I was working to punch the one card.
So I ended up with lots of unpunched cards and a few of them.
That was the main problem.
And I probably had, in the end, generated a few thousand cards.
They still exist like three-by-fives, really, because the holds I had have been effective.
I figured out the binary idea was a way to do something fast, and so that if it was bibliography or if it was certain kinds of content or something like that, if it didn't say anything else, at least I could find it through that, down the narrow edge, I had about twelve, sixteen bunches there, that I divided up into things that were quick access of a kind.
I said, well, that was something about history or something about, you know, those kind of large topics.
So I could needle those out in a hurry, and I did manage to punch those up pretty quickly.
So most of the cards have one punch on one side, but that's about it.
Now, as a novelist, in the traditional linear print sense, do you have a sense of permanence, I mean?
Do you have a permanence of the texts, of what you create, and having it remain in a... Well, yes and no.
I mean, the permanence of the text will exist in the computer, it won't exist on paper.
So already there's a kind of anomaly about it, but what we think of as permanent has already moved to light anyhow.
To light.
There will always be, as there are still monasteries and libraries with valuable manuscripts under glass, there will always be this kind of respect for the Gutenberg condition, whether it moved into a museum.
It's a very cumbersome technology relative to the movement of light.
Moving a book, moving the volume.
around, hundreds of these things around, in trucks, using up petrol and shelf space and warehouse space and so on, is incredibly comprehensive compared to computer storage.
So, I think publishing, for example, years ago I asked publishers, I mean,
just before i even got the hypertext so in the late 80s i was asking why are they actually publishing the books why don't they get the bookstores to do publishing they provide you provide your text by computer those days by this now by email um provide them the text and they can do the printing and finding and so on there's no need to have these huge this huge warehousing and pulping and you know having all these
But, of course, business is used to owning things that they sell.
They're not, you know, toothpaste or toilet paper or books.
And so they think of it as if you don't have this product, it's not, you know, as they're getting out of that finally.
But they couldn't kind of perceive that.
Now it's going to happen.
And I think in the next decade, not even to say about it anymore.
There will be increasing publishing by the bookstores, and the book chains especially.
They may actually start hiring their own little editorial staffs and just do it straight.
And the idea will be that with a kind of inexpensive binding mechanism and cover design can also be done computerized and moved by light.
produce all the books in their bookstores.
You'll come in and say, I would like a copy of this, I'd like a copy of that, and come back in the afternoon.
I went to the MIT Media Lab for this book, this project I'm working on.
There's a young man, they're 29 years old, and he's hitting the project called the e-book, the electronic book.
You've heard of this?
And it will look like a regular codex.
And they said it two or three years away from it, and they're doing this with electronic ink, and you will put
You'll load each one of these volumes that you'll buy with a little chip.
It'll have 3,000 books in it.
And you dial up the book that you want.
And then each page, we have a paper-like texture.
You'll read the book.
Each page will be a screen.
And we're working on this.
My wife, in fact, found this item, and I went to this.
But we're still talking about discrete work that is not changing.
When I'm talking about permanence, I'm talking about artistic creation and expression.
There's no need for hypertext to change either.
I mean, the interactivity that's so much rooted about is not necessarily a standard feature of this stuff.
We're having an impact on getting into the conference.
on these issues at Brown in the next spring, inviting a lot of the techies in and mixing them up with writers so that we try to get the right code.
Right now, much of this is, especially as seen on the internet, is hostile to text and the idea to text of any kind.
possible to anything that isn't Victorian or horrible, and to try to create a warmer atmosphere for this in the way they develop a new technology.
So the issue arises about the future of fiction, and there is a strong feeling amongst a lot of people that the future of fiction looks a little like games playing, and therefore it is instable, and it does
have a lack of permanence in the sense that each text continues to develop as the games players play with it.
But there's another kind of narrative art which exists inside the hypertextual medium that is itself
a fixed entity.
It's not read twice the same, either a print book.
It's just, it exists as a whole finished and enclosed thing.
One of the things we do about doing my hyper-picture, which are really focused on, not the games-playing metaphor, but upon
traditional narrative metaphors, is to ask, how do you achieve organicity in the fluid medium?
I mean, when you have a reader entering into your narrative space, there are so many possibilities of the way they can approach the text.
How do you not having the support of the page turning mechanism create a feeling of an organic whole?
This is a terrible challenge.
It's not easy.
Do people experience this today?
Is there a reader of the future that has to be required to come along with the fiction of the future?
I mean, are there people that enjoy this kind of reading experience today?
Oh, yeah.
In an artistic sense?
I don't know how, I don't know how... A recreational sense.
I'm wondering what it is.
Well, most of it's recreational still.
In terms of readers, I mean, not in terms of writers.
The better writers.
But then, that's true of books.
I mean, it's true of books.
I mean, all the great writers, few of the great writers I know have any audiences.
And that's even true of great writers of the past, who've got a vertical audience through time and have got tremendous respect amongst a few people in each generation, but are not widely written.
But Downey's still not a bestseller, and Shakespeare comes close in this country, but not in this other place.
Cervantes, I mean, you can almost, there's almost no writer who at any given moment
in time had so widely.
A writer we would describe as a great writer.
Well, the permanence of his text means something.
A lot of permanent texts could just as well be done, as you know.
A lot of crap that's kept as permanent texts.
And it's kind of an awesome respect for the book that emerged out of the ways the book evolved out of the Middle Ages, out of the monastic libraries and secrets hidden away that one would anticipate existed in the book, where everybody could get their hands on it.
You know, how the Book of Revelations might be really understood in the now contemporary language.
the Kabbalah idea.
And that awe of the terrible crimes and burning bones and so on that we feel is misplaced in a large sense.
And a lot of
We don't do it because we know nobody can make the judgment.
What gets both is apt to pee the best stuff, rather not the worst.
Well, except that there is a question that we don't.
I mean, a lot of the storage we see
We see data taken from some of these space poles at 115 years old and they can't even access it out because it's on magnetic plates that's deteriorating.
But there is no guarantee that... No, there never is.
There never is.
I agree.
All I meant was that the technology itself works
as a more efficient library than the libraries do.
That's what I mean.
You're dealing with libraries.
And that although, of course, they fail through everything, everything human fails, they have more of a chance of achieving those goals, those are desirable goals.
I know there's a lot of problems.
First, the main issue that we're bringing up at Brown Conference is standards, because one of the huge problems is changing standards.
All the stuff I did outdoors, I've got to move out the windows.
It'll eventually become more or less unreadable, even though it exists on disks, backup disks, and so on.
People will have to find old programs that you can read them, which may not be easily accessible.
It's like lost language or something.
I need new kinds of translators.
But one of the standards that was a kind of amazing standard, I remember
I remember, fairly recently, it must have been, well, within the last five years or so, someone pointed out to me that ASCII, you know, is only like 20 years old or something like that.
It's very recent.
I mean, it's a really, really recent idea.
And yet it's old.
Yeah, it's the oldest thing we've got, really, in a way.
And you worry that, what if suddenly that...
were changed.
If you moved from that to something else because something would be more efficient, what would be the consequences of that?
And, of course, it would immediately make inaccessible just vast areas.
It doesn't mean that you couldn't quite quickly translate everything into a new discard deal.
That's one of the great advantages, that you don't have to—it doesn't have irreplaceable physical content.
Its physical content, as with all digitized information, is in its reproduction.
We will eventually digitize everything, smells and tactile stuff.
So all of our sensual experiences can be in some manner digitized, but it only means that you put a code in that can somehow, something at the other end can actually translate that code back into the real thing.
So that if you put in the note C,
You know, in digitized form it comes out to be allowed to be some system that reads it and reproduces that sound.
So anything like tactile experiences or anything that has to do with our information exchange can be digitized and reproduced, provided,
at the other end there is something that can reproduce it.
And that's always the difficult thing, why we do these complicated suits and glasses and so on for virtual reality, is because the hard part is not digitizing, but undigitizing, you might think, putting it back into something.
So the problem of standards shifts and
tape deterioration and so on, really is not an impossible one to answer because we're not dealing with objects that have to be in some way preserved for dealing with textual tape that that stuff is stored on.
But basically we're dealing with something that can be translated quickly into any other kind of form.
The term they use now is migration.
Someone has to be sure that the migration
take place.
They say it's always zeros and ones.
I looked at this at Cornell, and they're all hot shots up there.
Well, in fact, hypertext began up there.
Well, not hypertext.
The real use of it became up there, because hypertext began with Ted Nelson, who came to Brown, actually, at a very critical moment in his career and in Brown's development.
And he was brought there by a graphic man called Andrews Van Der, Andy Van Der.
Andy was one of the early pioneers in computer graphics.
And Nelson came and did a lot of research in hypertextual form.
Have you read his work at all?
No.
I didn't bring along it.
By email, I'll send you.
Well, there's a conversation out on the web right now that I participated in.
I participated in it.
It was called, um, Rethinking Ted Nelson or something like that.
And you're in this, yeah.
So I'll send you the, uh, I'll send you the URL for that.
It's Feed Magazine.
Feed?
Feed.
F-E-E-D.
And they deal with four concepts of his, his thinker toys idea and his links.
He was the guy that developed the whole idea of hypertaxes, his invention of the word.
He was a kind of 60s guru of all this stuff.
But at Cornell is where they formed up this little group, that's where Stuart from Goldthorpe, I think, I don't know, Stuart, and Nancy Kaplan in her kitchen, who she now lives with Stuart, and the first gatherings of these people began.
This is so important.
Well, I'm writing about Cornell, and they just seem to come up in this context every place I turn.
My son is a Cornell grad, so I got to know Cornell well.
Nancy's now at Baltimore.
She lives with Stuart Mouford, who's this hypertext guy.
She's a very bright woman.
Nancy Kaplan?
Kaplan, yeah.
At Hopkins, you said?
No, at the University of Baltimore.
Well, Stuart's there, too, and Stuart's very good to talk.
I think Stuart's the wisest and most innovative of all the hypertext writers right now.
Stuart Moultrop, M-O-U-L-T-H-R-O-P.
This is his novel I talk about here, which I found much too academic, Victory Gardner, but he's moved away from that immensely, and he's working very vigorously out on the net, which is a hard thing to do.
It's a very hard environment to work in, and he's really trying to
trying to subvert and convert it.
He's a very valuable novel.
You've got how many novels here?
You must have a pretty heady dozen, perhaps?
More than that.
What's the more exciting medium for you to write in now?
Well, what really exciting talent is?
There's not so much exciting involved in the ages.
I tend to work on several things at once, and have done since I began writing.
And it means that there are like 50 to 100 projects, unfinished all day, and they're all sitting there like ideas or paragraphs or chapters or something that should be to draw.
What I was looking at now, I'm trying to work on a piece that I
It began in 1969 when I moved here.
And I just made a movie, a documentary film at Iowa on a confrontation in Iowa City.
It had to do with the Vietnam War program.
And this was in the 60s?
Yeah.
shot it all, and I had helped develop the film, and I had A and B wrote it, and I'd done it all.
I just wanted to learn everything I could learn about filmmaking at that time.
So I came away with a story idea, which I began then when I moved here, and interrupted it to work on a public burning, I thought, for six months, and, you know, five, six years went by.
And then I would keep taking it with me everywhere I went, and working on it, but then something else would take over.
I went to Venice with it, and Pinocchio at the Culver, and et cetera.
As I brought it here again, now that's, you know, we're thirty years later, and I'm still working on this text.
It's in the form of nine novellas, really, long novellas.
It's about a pornographic film hero.
Linked, to use a poem to it?
No, not really.
It's very narrative, very much a book narrative, in which
This pornographic film he wrote, his whole life he lived in film, and the films, each of the time, made by a different woman filmmaker, so there's nine women living in film.
And it's very hard work.
It's very, very hard work to say.
It's one reason I resisted all the time and do something else instead.
But because I have so many of these sorts of things, it's never been a huge temptation for me to get into the writing of hypertext.
I like teaching it.
I like to see what happens to students' heads when they get into it.
They become much better readers, much better writers.
Do they?
Oh, it transforms their perception of whatever.
Back in the 60s, I used to teach a course, I still taught it right up into the late 80s, called Exemplary Ancient Fictions.
We read Creation Myths and the Gilgamesh Epic and Enuma Elish and Book of Genesis.
Greek stories and myths and Roman, all of its metamorphoses and folk tales and various things on them to medieval romance.
And the whole idea of this thing was, it was a writing course.
They had to do a certain amount of academic work, but they also had to do some creative work.
The whole idea was to work with writers to help them understand narrative strategies that were pre-Servantes, as well as cutting off science.
and to perceive the possibility of narrative beyond what was in those days the standard form.
This was before Star Trek movies and there were a lot of things that might have inspired the imagination just weren't there and that we had these kind of dull and consistent repetitions of the past in terms of forms.
And the inability to see, until we worked at it, how conventional the so-called well-made story or the novel was.
I mean, it was not something that was natural, it was often felt to me, but depended, I didn't use the words in those days, but depended on book technology for the feeling of being in the right place, being the right thing for that medium.
But we were working on forms that escaped this limitation.
And those
Ancient fictions we'd work all semester long, and only sort of in closing moments.
Again, the light would begin to dawn.
Something would begin to happen with the writing, which would escape this limitation.
Undergraduates were quick to catch on, but the graduates were so ironclad already in their notion of what writing would be.
I taught my first hyperfiction workshop in the first week it was over.
I mean, that part was done.
You just sat down and you started doing it.
And wow, I mean, there was a sudden awareness about form.
You start with nothing.
So you have to build everything.
You want in line, you've got to put it there.
And the discovery of that, and the discovery, therefore,
how reading was done, and how writing fed the reading, and how the form dictated both.
Suddenly, the technology dictated the form.
uh was suddenly transparent and so the the leap is sort of instantaneous and non-problematic then of course it becomes interesting well you know what's the wonderful thing about what are the great moments of your book reading life and are these gone if we're in this space or can we somehow find a way to to do the same thing here is it important and that's kind of the challenge of course i'm dealing with
There are modest writers, students for the most part, and there have been no great writers yet working in hypertext, so dealing with people whose books I read them, I'd have mixed feelings about.
We're not just talking about students.
There have been no great writers yet.
That's a market statement, right?
In my second review, which you've read, I review, at that time, all the extensions.
Nobody gets a big fuss.
There's always a little twist at the end, even the positive reviews.
But there's good stuff, there's good writing.
As good as most stuff you'll find in books, we don't have a choice.
Of course, Cervantes is 150 years after Gutenberg.
It may take a while before we find the committed writer who is so engaged and so understands the medium and so lovely that writes the things that overwhelms us all.
What would be the market genius in your view?
I'm not for sure.
Especially when you're engaging the participation of the reader.
I can't say for sure.
I know the things that have worked so far.
but I had no idea what in the end it will be.
One reason for that is that one of my fretting
is the demotion of text itself, the diminution of its importance and power.
And I'm struggling against that, but this may, in the future, look like a dinosauric struggle.
It may be that all narrative in the future will be multimedia, and that this idea of text alone,
will be an old-fashioned idea that will be revisited like a kind of scholarly or playful exercise.
I hope, because what I feel to be the most interactive thing we do is look at those little squiggles on a page or a screen and convert them in archives into, you know, these
landscapes and complex characters and all sorts of things that happen inside our heads just by reading these little coded things here.
Just pulling a few of your words out of these articles.
Fluidity, contingency, indeterminism, plurality, discontinuity are becoming principles of hypertext.
And we are absolutely, there's a whole new
Yeah, I'm not saying necessarily those are all positives.
I'm saying that they're reality.
And that therefore it's a little hard for me working pretty much in the old print medium to foresee in 1990s exactly
what great narrative art's going to look like in this medium in years now.
This is inevitable in your years.
Oh yeah.
Digitization is inevitable.
I mean, the minute I understood digitizing, the minute I got a little glimmering of it, oh yeah, God, this changes everything.
It's going to be a total revolution.
It's so obvious.
I mean, it may not be a revolution that lasts a million years, but it's certainly going to last for the next few hundred years, I'm sure.
And that this characteristic, the characteristics of digital information,
you have to be alert to and aware of to understand what's going to happen.
And that's all I've been trying to do, most people have been trying to do, and there are a lot of prophets and a lot of people who have kind of convictions about what's going to happen, but so far I've not been convinced by anything yet.
I don't see it.
So what I work with, my students are traditional concepts.
They're not
They emerge from print, in fact.
So we talk about voice, for example.
Because voice seems to hold a hypertext together when nothing else does.
If the thing is all fragmentary, at least convincing and compelling voice,
a writer like Joyce, or working in this space, or Samuel Beckett.
Just the texture of the voice itself would be compelling enough to convince the reader that it's worth
carrying on through a space that is a little bit hard to map in his head.
It's a little bit challenging to sense of, I don't know exactly where, I don't know what page I'm on, I don't know how much further I'm about to go.
These are questions that you run into.
And voice is a counterbalance against the feeling of this version
That's a wonderful word.
That's why.
As I already mentioned, I'm already looking for what creates organic unity in a work that is not a linear text.
One of the answers to that tends to be that the narrative tends to be looked at like a physical space, not something that is strung on a line, but something that exists here at the same time that exists here.
And I'd like books to do it.
If you reread a book,
In the books you go back, going back to Ulysses and Don Quixote many times.
I no longer go back to them from page one to the end.
I go back to where I want to go.
I know them well and I can go at any point in them and I can search out things and think about those aspects of that narrative.
This requires a first reading, a prior reading.
Yes, yes it does.
But the fact is that it exists then in my mind as a landscape and not as a linear narrative as such.
I mean, I understand the linear nature of it and that can be true although I also can understand its spatial aspect.
So if I'm inventing a narrative in hypertext, I will tend to think of it in some way
perhaps as a narrative that exists whole and instantaneously in space.
There are ways in which you can
important off-spaces that cannot be reached until certain spaces to the distance.
So you can create a kind of limited sort of linear direction to something if you want and if you need it.
Maybe you don't.
Your memory doesn't need it.
And the only way that the memory requires linearity, if it is a big geographical space, if you think back out of your past, if I asked you to tell me, you know, how did you get into
How did you get into this work of writing?
He's built the books.
He wouldn't say, well, I was born in such and such a day, and I was born in a hospital or a hospital at some time.
You don't start that way.
You start, well, and you tell me an experience you had, and that experience leads to another.
And even if you're telling me, you're probably thinking of other things you're not going to tell me, but a flash to mind is a result.
This is all hypertextual experience.
And so if students work in a space that has a kind of
a spatial concept already, then it sometimes makes it easier to create a structure that has walls, that has limits, has a wholeness.
And it doesn't matter if the reader explores it all.
I don't need to explore the entirety of your memory, nor do you for that matter, to arrive at a rather full understanding of you or of
whatever the issue is or whatever the story is we're talking about.
All reading experiences are, by their nature, linear.
The linear experience is imposed upon this way willy-nilly.
You can't escape the way we live in common.
the way we approach a narrative is to step into it at a certain moment and leave it at a certain moment.
And in this process, as this process unfolds, it's a linear experiment.
Even though what we're doing is drifting perhaps through a geographical landscape in which the choices we make are our own about how we're going to go through it.
That aspect of it, that paradox,
as it can be part of the narrative itself, and it becomes as it was in Don Quixote, become an element.
But Don Quixote exists and enjoys as a discrete, complete, unchanged work.
Right.
Well, it's kind of hypothetical.
It can also exist as complete and unchanged.
I mean, in fact, if you buy any of these discs by Michael Joyce, they are what they are.
You put the disc in, you read it, and you put and take the disc out.
It's like having a book.
It's just that the book doesn't have page-turning mechanisms.
It has a different kind of mechanism.
But we talk about the hypertext, but we also talk about the experience of engaging the reader to develop their own scenarios.
That's a different kind of writing.
That's why I was saying it.
There are those who see it as a kind of games playing and believe that all the great fiction in the future will have this characteristic.
It will be a huge mass of databases in which the writer enters into the database and creates their own narrative that we're out of the potential that's there and structures those elements and adds elements as they want to.
That's the kind of Dungeons and Dragons way of going at fiction.
That's not the only way that it's being done, at least at this time.
What happens to the future, I can't say.
At this time, I see the likelihood that the author, far from being dead, is very much alive.
The author is going to become, in some respects, like a film director, in that it will require additional talents to fulfill everything he wants to do in the narrative.
so that if you want a graphic material, if you want sound, if you want some other things in it, voiceover, whatever, you're going to have to get some other talent to help you out.
But it's still going to be your work, and it's probably, probably, you're not going to allow tampering.
Probably.
You're not going to allow tampering.
That's essential.
It may or may not be.
I mean, some people,
I think it's kind of fun, the idea of opening up.
And they may write something that's very exciting.
Some people being the reader, but how about the creator who wants to have it?
There are creators who like the idea that, please, get in here and change all this and rewrite it.
And they provide what you might call a
a playground or a jungle gym, something that kind of framework that you can play around on.
You can do your own kind of stuff.
You can invent stuff.
But what endures?
What endures?
I mean, if we define an age by cultural achievements, that we can see.
Yeah, but how do you know from something that one of these interactions is magnificent, but it only exists at one time?
Maybe I'm missing something here.
Well, that may be the nature of the age and what makes it great, viewed from a certain angle.
It may be seen that this appetite for permanence and so on is a perverse appetite.
It's been with us for thousands of years.
Yeah, finally reshending it, you know, finally getting rid of this thing.
and understand life as it really is lived.
I'm just giving an argument, being devil's advocate.
I'm still basically a book writer and reader.
It's just that I don't have any hostility to all of this.
So I feel comfortable.
I don't feel uncomfortable.
I actually am sort of playing around with the hypertext.
But even as I'm doing it, I'm simultaneously doing it in a linear form.
Did you bring some examples of hypertext?
Did you mention that you might?
Well, I have disks, but I have only my copies.
I should have copied them.
It's all on Macs.
And I'm working on PCs.
I've always worked on them.
The stuff on Macs I've got at home.
But I could have sent to you anything you wanted.
Really.
And by the way, I would be happy to show you the quotes.
I've got problems showing you.
subjects, what I've written before I use it in a great attempt to make sure we get it right.
You've not looked at any of these guys yet?
At people like Joyce and Wolfram.
Joyce, I haven't.
I've got the hypertext book, of course, Landau's book.
Well, George, Landau is a great enthusiast.
He's one of these guys who just has this kind of wonderful
uh optimism about the form that it's fun to quote it because it's full of the hyperbolic uh anticipation but um but he's not a writer